Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
Gregory Benford has emerged as one of the leading science fiction writers in recent
years with such efforts as In the Ocean of Night and the multi-award-winning Timescape.
And Benford's writing is characterized not only by the meticulous detail paid to scientific
aspects but also by its elegant literary style.
We ask him why he focuses on style.
Being a professor of physics at the University of California, Irvine, Benford is not a full-time
writer.
In order to produce works of science fiction, he is forced to write when he can.
It's not really left over because it's my weekends and evenings.
How do I do it?
Sometimes I wonder.
The best answer is hurriedly.
But in fact, I do work on my prose a great deal.
I do many drafts of everything.
I recently acquired a word processor to make this process simpler.
But fundamentally, long ago I decided to practice time conservation wherever possible.
The first rule of that is never do anything twice unless you enjoy it.
So I try to never say have to redraft simple things like memos and always very selective
about what I do with my time.
But he views this dual role as an aid to his writing, not a hindrance.
I draw a lot of my material that I write about from life, from observing people and so on.
So I'm really doing two things at once.
When I go to a scientific conference, I'm sopping up the material, but I'm also sopping up scientists
watching the way people actually act.
Every novelist does that.
It's just that most novelists are full-time writers and therefore they don't get out and
see the real world very much.
I think that's the great liability of being a professional writer who only does that,
is that you run out of material.
And I think the 20th century is full of writers whose big problem is that they ran out of material.
Even with his crowded schedule, Benford manages to squeeze in a little reading.
I read when I can the best science fiction and the best in the mainstream.
And also, for example, hardball detective stories and a lot of other things.
Now I keep up on the prominent short story writers in America, for example.
So I try to read eclectically.
He acknowledges that his reading does influence his style to some extent, although he allows
that his style changes from book to book.
I don't really think that I've got a style.
I certainly have some identifiable mannerisms.
But it seems to me that every one of my books is written somewhat differently.
And I do change style and approach fairly often.
I may be wrong about that.
Many people may think that there is a noticeable Benford style.
But I don't think that I pick up those things from my reading directly, although certainly
I'm influenced by a lot of writers.
Every writer is influenced by people who came before.
Otherwise we'd have to invent literature a whole each time we sat down to do a novel.
More on Gregory Benford tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
In today's program we continue our discussion with science fiction author Gregory Benford.
Benford has an interesting concept of how science fiction differs from mainstream literature.
I think that mainstream and any genre like SF are in a sense two ends of a spectrum.
And one blends into the other.
There are obviously the books that only SF addicts will read and which are incomprehensible to ordinary readers.
And that defines a boundary, but obviously it's a gradual transition from one to the other.
Science is in SF not the really crucial dividing point.
There are many things in science fiction which set it apart which are not connected with knowing a great deal of science,
but rather with knowing a lot of accepted bits of jargon or common places we've assumed about the future,
the way galactic empires are put together and so forth, usually very simple-mindedly in my estimation.
And an ordinary reader coming to these things simply cannot understand them, therefore he rather usually quickly gives up.
But therefore I think that it's the mannerisms of SF that tend to set it apart as much as anything else.
Of course science fiction is concerned with content, a great deal more than other literature,
and therefore that secures off people too.
The novel Timescape took Benford a decade to conceive and to execute.
Timescape has received accolades from those who do not ordinarily read science fiction.
We ask Benford why such people are surprised when they read a science fiction work that is also good literature.
Yes, I've gotten a fair number of letters and phone calls and so on from people who, quote,
don't usually read science fiction, unquote, and are surprised to find that science fiction
can actually have all the virtues of a regular novel and still be science fiction.
Well, it's good that these people are catching on to that fact.
Admittedly, the field has not given them a large number of examples to learn from,
but I hope we will in future.
Of course, the reason we haven't produced such books before is because it's damned hard.
It's a lot of work and science fiction is typically not a field which rewards taking a decade to write a book.
That's a sad fact, but it's true.
Benford rewrote his first novel, Deeper Than the Darkness, and retitled it The Stars in Shroud.
This was apparently motivated by his deep desire to produce well-written science fiction.
I didn't want the old works to appear with my name on them when I could see that they were so deeply flawed,
and I thought I could do a better job.
I don't think I'm going to do that with any more of my books, but I certainly greatly revised a novel of mine.
I sort of homaged to the Heinlein Juvenile called Jupiter Project.
I revised that when it went into paperback, and I did that, as you said, with the Stars in Shroud.
Basically, I don't like to have less than my best in front of the public,
and I care more about craftsmanship than I do about storing up my energies for the next project.
I would prefer to salvage an old work and hammer away at a new one if I could be contented
that at least I had never done anything I thought was really dreadful and allowed it to go out in public.
A lot of writers don't feel this way, and I understand, particularly economically, why they would believe so.
In our next show, we will discuss some details of Benford's novel, Times Gate.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show,
so stay with us.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson.
Gregory Benford's novel, Times Gate, was published in 1980 to great acclaim.
The hardback edition has already become a collector's item.
The novel has garnered many awards, including the Nebula and the John W. Campbell International Award.
Benford was motivated to write it because he wanted to portray it realistically, a scientist at work.
I took ten years to write Times Gate.
It's written out of my experience as a graduate student at the University of California in the 1960s.
Two-thirds of the book occurs in 1962 and 63, and I had always noticed that science fiction very seldom dealt with the life of a scientist
as it is really lived, as I saw it.
Benford woven to the matrix of a scientist at work, a unique twist on time travel stories, The Time Telegram.
When I began to think about writing a book about time, a subject that had already and always fascinated me,
and which science fiction had, it seemed to me, done to death,
I began in fact to think about the way scientists would really try to attempt to transmit information across time.
Not time travel, but simple time telegrams, if you will.
And how would it happen? What would make people do it? How would it be received?
What would scientists think about it?
Because you see, the basic ingredient in the novel is to treat time communication like a new paradigm in science,
so that you have scientists confronting something that's very unusual that they can't explain,
that seems to not fit the standard way of doing science.
After all, here's an experiment that's being interfered with and seems to be carrying a message. How bizarre.
And so, this is like a scientist encountering a brand new scientific idea.
So you get to see in a dramatic fashion how scientists deal with ambiguity and the unusual nature of their work,
which does crop up now and then. After all, that's what scientific revolutions are about.
About two-thirds of Timescape takes place in 1963, and the remainder in 1998.
Minford chose those particular dates for a reason.
There are a number of real-life people in Timescape. We asked Minford if he had to seek their permission to write them in the book.
Well, the people who actually have walk-on speaking parts, who are identified as real people, I got the permission from,
Freeman Dyson, particularly. People who were mentioned in passing, I didn't ask for permission because after all,
they are people in the world and you can't refer to them. No one has a copyright on his name.
Minford himself is a character in Timescape.
There are some twins from Oklahoma who are not named in there, who are in fact myself and my twin brother.
We asked Minford if while he was writing Timescape, he feared its style might prevent its becoming a commercial success.
Definitely. But I decided what the hell I was going to write the book the way I wanted to, and I didn't care how it would do.
In fact, when I finished the manuscript, I was pretty convinced that I would be able to sell it for only a minimal advance,
and that would be just about it. I personally thought it was by far the best piece of writing I'd ever done,
but that doesn't mean I thought it was going to be commercial. In fact, I didn't.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.